#summary Prophetic utterances of the past, present, and future...

= Version Scheme =

*Scheme*: _MAJOR.MINOR.MICRO (development phase)_

Generally speaking, _major version numbers_ indicate major milestones.  For example, version 1.0 will indicated that all of the most critically parts of Durbatulûk are complete and stable.

_Minor version numbers_ indicate the introduction of new features, but may not be different enough from the previous release to warrant major version number changes.  Minor versions will generally be compatible within the same major version number.

_Micro version numbers_ indicate maintenance releases.

Some versions of Durbatulûk may indicate a development phase.  _Pre-alpha_ generally indicates that the version has all of the wires ripped out and is not suitable for anything except for lab experimentation.  _Alpha_ means that the version is ready for initial testing, but that significant problems probably exist, and that the version may not be feature complete.  _Beta_ means that the version is feature complete and is ready for rigorous testing.  _Final_ means that the version has been tested rigorously and is ready for deployment.

= The Spirit of Durbatulûk Past =

_Durbatulûk was void, and without form._

= The Spirit of Durbatulûk Present =

Durbatulûk is currently at Version 0.0.0 pre-alpha, meaning that you are welcome to experiment with it, but it's not ready for use yet.  See GettingStarted to start experimenting.  When version 0.0 is final, the basic ability to command and control a network of Linux clients will be in place.

= The Spirit of Durbatulûk Future =

Durbatulûk planned features for the foreseeable future are listed below.  This list includes only the most important features for each version, and is subject to change.  Since micro releases are generally maintenance-only releases, these are not listed below.

== 0.0 ==

 * Linux only
 * Interface via shell commands only (no interactive interface)
 * Useful only to geeks

== 0.1 ==

 * Linux only
 * Easy setup of clients and commanders
 * Interactive commander interface

== 0.2 ==

 * Linux & Windows
 * Installer for Windows
 * GUI-based interface for Windows
 * Windows support for shell commands only

== 0.3 ==

 * Basic ability to interact with the Windows GUI interface via screen captures, mouse emulation, basic Windows messaging

== 0.4 ==

 * Ability to establish interactive sessions

== 1.0 ==

 * All of the above
 * Possible switch to known standards such as OpenSSL .pem certificates
 * Peer-reviewed
 * Likely to include features not yet envisioned
 * Stable and ready for general deployment

_Beyond this, the future is not ours to see..._